[SQUEAKING]
[RUSTLING]
[CLICKING]
LAWRENCE GUTH: So this is the
second day of our little unit
on random walks, on groups.
And the first day,
we introduced it,
and the second day, we'll
describe some more modern stuff.
And the second day will be a
little bit more of a survey.
I won't prove everything,
but I'll try to--
and in the second
day, we'll see how it
connects to projection theory.
OK, so first, let's recall
where we're talking about.
So we have a finite
group G. And then we
have a probability measure on
G. And we have an operator T mu.
T mu of f is f
convolved with mu.
And so this does a
step of a random walk.
So if f is the probability
distribution at some moment,
then you make a step
of the random walk,
and then T mu f is the new
probability distribution.
So T mu of 1 is 1, the
constant function 1.
And T mu maps the
functions of mean 0.
So these are functions who
sum to 0 or have mean 0,
it maps it to itself.
And sigma 1 of T mu is the
largest singular value of this.
And we saw that
sigma 1 of T mu is
related to the mixing
behavior of this random walk.
So we always have
that sigma 1 of T mu
is less than or equal to 1.
And we don't use
a positive number.
And sigma 1 of T mu is
strictly less than 1.
Then that gives some kind of
mixing of the random walk.
We made that precise last time.
Next, we focused
on the group SL2Fp.
And one special
feature of this group
came from representation theory.
So we had a
proposition that if you
have a representation
of this group,
so that's a unitary
representation,
and let's say it's non-trivial,
then D has to be pretty big.
And we use that to
prove a mixing estimate.
Mixing estimate says that
if mu is a probability
measure on this group,
then sigma 1 of T mu
is bounded by p squared
times mu L2 squared.
For example, if A is
just a subset of SL2Fp,
then there's a uniform
measure on A, mu A.
And it's straightforward to
check that its L2 norm squared,
mu A L2 norm squared is
1 over the size of A.
So a corollary is that if
A is significantly bigger
than p squared, then the random
walk using A mixes rapidly.
So corollary, if for instance,
A is bigger than p to the 2.1,
then sigma 1 of TA, so I'll
write TA is an abbreviation
for T mu A, sigma 1 of TA would
be smaller than something like p
to the negative 1/10.
So it would mix quite rapidly.
So this is a nice proposition.
And it's kind of
sharp of its type.
Because if the set A
is a subgroup of SL2Fp,
then the random walk will not
generate, will not mix at all,
and there are subgroups,
or easy subgroups that
have size around p squared.
So we can't do better than this.
So remark is that this
corollary is sharp
because there exists H, a
proper subgroup size of H
around p squared.
So for instance, H is the
upper triangular matrices.
Yeah?
AUDIENCE: If you have,
for a different group,
a similar proposition
where you can lower bound
the dimension of the nontrivial
unitary representation,
could you also use that as an
upper bound for the sigma 1
for that group?
LAWRENCE GUTH: Yeah,
so the question
is if we had an analog
of this proposition
for some other group,
say SLDFp, then could we
do this whole story for
all these other groups?
Yeah, you could.
That's all that
we've used so far.
Yeah, OK, cool.
So then also last class,
we stated an old theorem,
which goes rather--
it's older than this
proposition, but it goes rather,
it does not obviously
follow from it.
So theorem, this theorem is
essentially due to Selberg,
although he didn't say
it in quite this way.
So here, A, so we pick A is a
particular list of generators
of SL2Fp.
So this is perhaps the simplest
set of generators of SL2Fp.
But it is also somewhat
special in a way
that we'll talk about when
we talk about the proof.
So then the conclusion is that
sigma 1 of TA is less than 1
minus c, where c is
positive and c is--
this is true for every p.
So c does not depend on p.
So these all mix uniformly fast.
So this theorem is not
an immediate corollary
of this proposition because
this is a much smaller set.
And so today, a couple
of goals in this survey.
The first goal is
to sketch a proof
of this theorem in which this
proposition plays a key role.
But we'll see some other ideas.
And a second goal
is to discuss what
happens if you replace what was
special about this generating
set at all, and what
happens if we replace it
by some other generating set.
OK, so the first proof was
due to Selberg, basically.
But that proof was
quite difficult.
It used a bunch of stuff,
including the Neyman hypothesis
for curves over finite fields.
We're going to follow
a later proof which
is due to Sarnak and Xua, and
perhaps simplified or adjusted
a bit by various people.
OK, cool.
All right, so this
set is symmetric,
meaning that if a group
element is in the set,
so is the inverse.
And so we could say that
mu is symmetric if mu of g
is equal to mu of g inverse
for every g in G. And T mu,
actually, it's a bit
nicer if mu is symmetric.
And here's why.
So remark, mu is symmetric.
That is equivalent to
saying that the operator T
mu is symmetric as a matrix.
And so because-- so if you
think of T mu as a matrix,
then it has a g1, g2
entry, and the g1, g2 entry
is mu of g1, g2 inverse.
So if you switch these, you're
taking the inverse of that.
And if mu is symmetric,
that doesn't matter.
So it's a symmetric matrix.
So that's nice because
a symmetric matrix,
you can diagonalize it.
And instead of just
having singular values,
it has eigenvalues.
So once T mu is a
symmetric matrix,
then the first singular
value of T mu to the k
is the first singular
value of T mu to the k.
It helps to have a
blackboard to say it.
And so that suggests a--
this is helpful.
This isn't true for
non-symmetric matrices.
But it's true for
symmetric matrices.
And it suggests
a strategy of how
to get a handle on
sigma 1 of T mu.
So we can say the
following thing.
So we have sigma 1.
Yeah, let's also think
about T mu to the k.
So T mu to the k of f
is f convolved with mu
and then convolved
with mu and so
on k times, which is f convolved
with mu convolved with itself
k times.
So that's an
operator of our type.
But with a new
measure, the measure
is mu convolved
with itself k times.
So therefore, sigma 1 of
T mu to the k, sigma 1 T
mu to the k, which is
sigma 1 of T mu to the k.
So if you try to explain
this without a blackboard,
you have to have really
good ability to evoke things
with your voice.
All right, so mu might
be the uniform measure
on this set of four elements A.
And if we apply this proposition
directly to that set of four
elements, it gives us nothing.
But we can use this.
And then we can try to apply
the proposition to mu to the k.
So if we put together
what we have,
we can make the following
corollary, sigma of T mu
to the k--
so OK, so this is if mu is
a probability measure on SL2
of Fp, then sigma
1 of T mu to the k
is bounded by, well, this thing.
And for this thing, we can
apply our proposition here.
So we get p squared times
mu tensor k L2 squared.
So for the original, if you
take the Selberg measure A then
for the original
mu A, this thing
would be much too big
to be interesting.
But perhaps we could
find a high power k
where this L2 norm is actually
smaller than 1 over p squared.
And that would give us
an interesting bound.
Cool, so all of the stuff
that we'll talk about today
is based on this corollary.
So you can think
about it like this,
you start off with a probability
measure mu, and we want to know,
does it get really evenly
mixed if you convolve it
with itself a lot of times?
And what we'll see here is
that maybe if you convolve it
with itself a bunch of times, it
will get fairly well mixed, not
spectacularly well mixed,
but just fairly well mixed
to guarantee that this L2
norm is smaller than 1 over p
squared.
So if it manages to be
kind of roughly evenly
distributed around p to the
2.1 elements in this group,
that would be good enough that
this would be less than 1.
Once that happens, we
can use this corollary
and we can bound sigma 1.
And once we bound
sigma 1, then we'll
see that that, in turn, tells us
what happens as we keep mixing.
Then we'll be able to say
it gets really very well
mixed at some later time.
OK, but how can we--
so how can we bound this?
How can we show that mu tensor
k is decently well mixed, fairly
well mixed?
So there are two
different approaches
that we'll talk about today.
So one approach, which is
special for this theorem,
involves either--
let me say it involves
lifting to SL2Z and/or
it involves hyperbolic geometry.
I'll describe it in a couple
of slightly different ways.
So first let's talk
about lifting to SL2Z.
So if you reduce mod
p, it gives a group
homomorphism from SL2Z to SL2Fp.
So let's suppose that M is a
probability measure on SL2Z.
And mu is the
pushforward pi p of M.
So that's a probability
measure here.
And this setup with group
homomorphisms commutes,
plays nicely with convolution.
So if I take the pushforward of
M convolved with itself k times,
I will get mu convolved
with itself k times.
So one approach to try to
understand mu convolved
with itself a bunch of
times is to first try
to understand M convolved
with itself a bunch of times
and then try to understand
what happens when we perform
this push forward.
So here's our plan, study M
convolved with itself k times
to study the push
forward operation.
So this is a reasonable
strategy because of the fact,
or to the extent that we
feel that SL2Z is easier
to get our hands on then SL2Fp.
And there are a couple of
reasons that SL2Z is easier
to get our hands on then SL2Fp.
Let me call this good
features of SL2Z.
We won't necessarily use all of
these, but let me mention them.
So the first feature is
that SL2Z is virtually free.
So that virtually
means is that there
is a subgroup H in SL2Z which
is a finite index free subgroup.
So in general, if you say that
a group is virtually blah,
it means that there's a finite
index subgroup, which is blah.
So it's pretty
close to being free.
That's not true
at all for SL2Fp.
You take SL2Fp, take
the simplest generators
you can think of, try to
write down all the relations,
it's not super easy.
I don't personally know
how to do it, although I
think people know how to do it.
OK, number two, SL2Z is
sitting inside of SL2R.
It's kind of a discrete
approximation of SL2R,
so it's pretty closely
related to a Lie group.
This is what we'll actually use.
And number three is
that SL2Z acts nicely--
maybe I should call it 2B, it's
quite closely related to two.
It acts nicely on
the hyperbolic plane.
So recall that the isometries of
the hyperbolic plane is PSL2R.
So SL2R, basically
SL2R, not quite.
So SL2R acts by isometries
on the hyperbolic plane.
And SL2Z is sitting
inside there,
so it acts by isometries
on the hyperbolic plane.
And that action is
captures a lot of SL2Z.
You can also use this
to help understand SL2Z.
And so all three of these
things are much more complicated
for SL2Fp.
All right, so I don't-- so
one of the things that I
won't completely prove is some
thing about doing convolutions
on SL2Z.
But I want to give
some intuition
and rough statement about it.
So intuition about
convolution on SL2Z.
So as a warm up, I want to
think about convolution on Z.
So let's say nu is a
probability measure on Z.
And I take nu convolved
with itself k times.
So nu is some fixed simple
probability measure.
Maybe let's take nu of x is
1/2 if x is plus minus 1 and 0
otherwise.
So what happens when we
convolve it with itself k times?
Well, the central
limit theorem tells us
that this thing is
almost a Gaussian.
Gaussian, also closely related
to the heat kernel on R.
So in analogy with
this, what might we
hope to happen when we
take a measure on SL2Z
and we convolve it
with itself a lot?
So you might hope--
so we have M, measure,
probability measure on SL2Z.
So you might hope to have
some kind of central limit
theorem for matrices.
And it would say that M
convolved with itself a lot
is sort of like the heat kernel,
which needs to be defined,
on SL2R.
OK, so this seems
like a natural thing
in the intersection of
probability theory and matrix
theory and has been
studied, although I'm not
an expert on it, but cf
work of Furstenberg and.
So I believe that I know roughly
how it works out, although I
don't have a precise statement.
But let me tell you roughly
how I think it works out.
And then we'll
see how this would
be helpful to understand SL2Fp.
So first of all, we'll have
some kind of balls in SL2R.
So BT is the set of
matrices A, B, C, D
in SL2R with the property
that a squared plus b
squared plus c squared plus d
squared is at most R squared--
is at most T squared.
So this is some of rough--
some sort of notion
of a ball in the group SL2R.
You could imagine
a fancier notion
where you start with
the Lie algebra,
you put a ball in
and you take the
exponential map.
And that's probably a better
thing to do than this.
But this is a very
low brow definition.
And it is approximately
describes balls.
And then if we're
interested in SL2Z,
we would take the
integer points in this.
BT of Z, that's defined to
be BT intersected with SL2Z.
So these are integers.
So for reference, what is
the cardinality of BT of Z?
So little lemma, cardinality of
BT of Z is roughly T squared.
Sketch, really choose
a and d minus T,
T. So that's T squared choices.
And then we have to solve b
times c is a times d minus 1.
I think I did that right.
So here, your SL2R, the
determinant is 1, so ad minus bc
is 1.
So we have this integer
of size around T squared.
And we want to know
how many ways are there
to factor it into two
integers of size around T. OK,
so not every integer
will factor like this.
It could be prime.
But mostly, they will
factor like that.
And how many ways
will they factor?
Well, not too many ways, at
most, T to the epsilon ways.
So number of choices for b
and c is on the order of 1.
So the level of our back of
the envelope computation,
there should be about T squared
group elements in there.
All right, so there is a vague
statement that if you fix M,
then M star to the k is roughly
equidistributed on the ball
of radius T for T around
exponential of some constant
depending on M times k.
So it's not stated precisely,
but this is roughly
what I think the central limit
theorem should say in SL2Z.
In a little bit we'll do the
hyperbolic geometry point
of view, where I'll be
able to state things
a little bit better if we want.
OK, so that's step one of our
plan, study what the convolution
looks like in upstairs in SL2Z.
Next, we need to think about
what happens when we project
from SL2Z down to SL2Fp.
Why don't we pause
there, actually?
I mean, I did some things
not completely precisely,
but let me see if people have
any questions, or comments,
or are bothered by things.
Yeah?
AUDIENCE: Question about
[INAUDIBLE] to the existence
of the heat kernel that--
the heat kernel on
R, and, in general,
kind of Euclidean looking spaces
is kind of closely related
to the Fourier transform.
But in a non-abelian group,
is there anything analogous to
that that makes this some sort
of heat kernel-ish thing work?
LAWRENCE GUTH: Yeah
so the question
is, how does the heat kernel
work in a non-abelian group?
Let me punt on that until we get
to the hyperbolic space version.
And we'll talk about
the heat kernel
there, which is a little
bit easier, at least for me,
to make it precise.
So let's do the second step,
where we pass from SL2F--
from SL2Z to SL2Fp.
So remember our setup that M is
a probability measure on SL2Z
And then mu is the
pushforward of M, which is
probability measure on SL2Fp.
Also, let's mention that gamma
p could be the kernel of pi p.
So that's a normal
subgroup of SL2Z.
And it's gamma p is the
set of a, b, c, d in SL2Z,
so that a, d, b, c is congruent
to the identity mod p.
OK, great, so now our goal
is to understand the L2 norm
of some convolution of this.
And here's a cute
trick, little lemma.
So if mu is symmetric, so for
instance, if M is symmetric,
then mu tensor k L2 squared is
mu tensor 2k of the identity.
So here's the proof.
Let's start on the other side.
Mu tensor 2k of the
identity is, well,
mu tensor k convolved with--
so I was saying
the word "tensor."
That was not the right word.
I mean convolved.
Mu convolved k convolved with
mu convolved k, the identity.
So that's the sum over g in our
group, mu convolved k of g mu
convolved k of g inverse.
That's how you
convolve two functions.
But what's nice is that mu
is symmetric is that these
are the same as each other.
So we just get the sum on g
mu convolved k of g squared.
So that's equal to that.
OK, cool, so that's convenient,
because now we just have
to estimate this one thing.
And mu convolved 2k
of the identity is--
that's something
that lives here,
but we can relate it to
something that lives here.
It's the sum g in gamma
p of M convolved 2k of g.
So in other words, we want
to know how much mass--
what is the measure, using
this measure M convolved 2k,
what is the measure of
the subgroup gamma p.
All right, now M convolved 2k is
approximately evenly distributed
on some ball.
So by the vague
statement, this is
equivalent to estimating
what fraction of the ball
is in gamma p.
So we have some big
ball in our Lie group.
What fraction of it is
in the subgroup gamma p?
So remark, the index of
gamma p is the cardinality
of SL2Fp, which
is around p cubed.
So if this were
evenly distributed,
then you would expect this
quotient to be about 1
over p cubed.
And that's basically true.
So here's another lemma.
BT intersected with
gamma p is bounded
by T squared over p cubed, which
is also like the size of BT
of Z over p cubed.
So it is pretty
evenly distributed.
All right, so here's the proof.
So we're looking for
a, b, c, d, where
each entry is size smaller
than T. And they're integers.
And we want this to be
congruent to 1, 0, 0, 1, mod p.
So first of all, let's try
to do a back of the envelope
calculation.
So if I erase this
congruence condition,
then I'm just asking how many
integer points are there in BT.
And we said before,
that's about T squared.
Now, I'd like a to be
congruent to 1 mod p.
So maybe I should
divide by p for that.
And I'd like b to
be congruent to 0,
so maybe I should
divide by p again.
And I have four conditions.
So maybe I should
divide by p four times,
T squared divided
by P to the fourth.
Is anybody suspicious?
OK, so that's the wrong answer.
It should be closer to T
squared divided by p cubed.
And the reason that
was not really OK to do
is that those four
conditions are not
independent of each other.
We already know that ad minus
bc is 1 because we're in--
I didn't write this properly.
This is supposed to be in SL2Z,
which means that ad minus bc
equals 1.
And I think that
probably implies
that once I have three of
these congruence conditions,
then I would get the fourth.
But it also brings up the
point that I shouldn't
be too fast and loose.
That it's not super obvious
that all of these things
are independent of each other.
So there is actually a
kind of algebra trick
to make this work that
allows us to keep things
more independent of each other.
And here is the algebra trick.
OK, so b is divisible by p.
And c is divisible by p.
So p divides b, and p divides
C. Therefore, p divides bc.
And bc is ad minus 1--
sorry, p squared divides bc.
And so p squared
divides ad minus 1.
These are equal to each other.
All right, similarly,
p plus 1 divides a--
sorry, p divides a minus 1.
So a is congruent to 1 mod p.
And p divides d minus 1.
So p squared divides a
minus 1 times d minus 1.
All right, the leading term
here is also a times d.
So we can play these
off against each other.
And we conclude that p squared
divides a plus d minus 2.
All right, now let's
start choosing things.
So we're going to choose a.
And a has an integer
of size at most T.
And it's congruent to 1 mod p.
So I have less than
T over p choices.
Next, I'm going to choose d.
I've already chosen a.
So I now know the value of
d modulo p squared because
of this sneaky algebra trick.
So I get, at most, T
over p squared choices.
This was only really OK if
T is at least p squared.
So let me say T is
at least p squared.
And now, once I've
chosen a and d,
now I have to solve for b and c.
And I forget about
all the congruences,
just like above, they're
at most around 1 choices.
And so now, they are less
than 1 choice, choose b and c.
That's because bc is
ad minus 1 as integers.
Yeah?
AUDIENCE: When
you're saying there's
kind of at most one
factorization of ad minus 1,
would that actually be
a log of, to be precise,
the number of factors?
LAWRENCE GUTH: Yeah,
so the question
is, how many factors are there
if a number of some size?
And it is a little
super constant.
So if this number has size n,
It's actually more than log n.
It could potentially
could be worse than that.
But it's less than n to the
epsilon for any epsilon.
And that's what this
symbol was supposed to be.
AUDIENCE: A whole lot of
symbols being slightly different
versions of [INAUDIBLE].
LAWRENCE GUTH: Yeah, I know.
So any other questions or
comments about the lemma?
So those are the ingredients
of the Sarnak-Xua proof
of theorem one.
All the ingredients are
rigorous and precise,
except for the vague
statement about how random
walks behave on SL2Z.
And if we're willing
to believe that,
then we can put them together
and prove theorem one.
OK, so proof of theorem one.
So M will be MA for
this set A SL2Z.
Then by the vague
statement, M convolves
k times is roughly
equidistributed on BT,
where T is around x of
some constant times k.
So now, we will choose k.
So we'll choose T to be a
little more than p squared.
So that we can use the
lemma at the end, which
means that k is around log p.
So take around
round log p steps,
and after that, M convolves k
is roughly evenly distributed
on a ball of size T p squared.
And I guess here we
can put 2k, I guess.
So then M star 2k of gamma p
will be around BT intersect
gamma p over BT, which is
smaller than p to the minus 3
by our lemma.
And here, we're
losing a little power.
So if I wanted to be more
clear about what I was saying,
that would be
something like this.
Therefore, mu
tensor k L2 squared,
that's the same thing as
m tensor 2k of gamma p.
And so that would be around p
to the minus 3 plus epsilon.
In particular, significantly
smaller than p to the minus 2.
And then we use the corollary.
That gives us a bound for this.
And we get that sigma 1
of t mu is less than 1
minus c, where the c
is independent of p.
OK, let me tell you just briefly
about the hyperbolic geometry
point of view.
And then we'll switch to
other choices of generators.
OK, hyperbolic
geometry, all right,
so we mentioned that
SL2Z or SL2R acts
on the hyperbolic plane H2.
Let's say that X of p
is H2 modulo gamma p.
So X of 1 is the hyperbolic
plane modulo SL2Z.
And X of p is a cover of it.
X of p is a cover of X of 1.
And the group of deck
transformations is SL2Fp.
OK, so I would like to try
to make a picture of this.
So X of 1 is not
quite a manifold,
but it's not super
important for this
except for being a
technical irritation.
So I'm not going to
try to draw that.
So it is almost a non-compact
manifold of genus 1.
It looks sort of like this.
The non-compactness is annoying,
but it's maybe important.
So then X of p is
a cover of this.
So it's going to
look sort of like so.
And I guess it has
a cusp for each.
It also has some cusps,
not sure exactly how many.
This is X of p.
And this is a cover.
So how to make that look nice?
Well, you could kind of chop
this into fundamental domains.
And then each fundamental domain
is a bijection onto X of 1.
And if you do this
nicely, so then
the different
fundamental domains,
they correspond to the group
of deck transformations, which
is SL2Fp.
And if you do this nicely,
you could put a dot
in each fundamental domain.
And you could put an edge
if the fundamental domains
touch each other.
And the graph that
I just drew would
be a Cayley graph of SL2Fp.
So the geometry of these
two-dimensional surfaces
is closely related to
the geometry of SL2Fp.
So then, we talk about the
spectrum of the Laplacian On
xp, our subject of study.
And 0 is in the spectrum, so the
Laplacian of a constant function
is 0.
But after 0, there's a gap.
So if this is the real
line, and here's 0,
that's part of the spectrum.
Then there's a gap.
And this is called
lambda 1 of X of p.
And the rest of the spectrum
lives here, is contained in.
So that's what lambda 1 is,
the smallest non-zero part
of the spectrum.
All right, so the theorem
that Selberg actually proved
in the 1950s is that lambda 1 of
X of p is at least 3/16 for all
p.
And the conjecture is
that lambda 1 of X of p
is at least a quarter,
maybe minus little o of 1,
I'm not sure if you
need it, but certainly
if somebody proved that, that
would be a big deal, for all p.
This may not look immediately
that it matters very much.
A quarter is a
significant number
because it's lambda 1
of hyperbolic plane.
So I would say, it matches that.
Anyway, so this is the theorem
that Selberg actually proved.
With modern techniques,
it's not that
difficult to get from this
theorem to that theorem.
It's much more difficult to
prove either one of them.
OK instead of the random
walk, we could use here,
the heat flow on X of p.
And there was a question
earlier, what is the heat flow?
So the question earlier was
what is the heat flow on SL2R?
But the analysis
question here is,
what is the heat flow on
this hyperbolic manifold?
Well, you can think of it as
solving the heat equation.
So the heat equation
would be del t
of u equals Laplacian of u.
And the Laplacian of k would
take a while to write down,
but it's a second order
differential operator
on your hyperbolic manifold.
All right, OK, and the
solution has a formula
using a heat flow operator.
So let's say u of dot
comma t would be Ht of u.
So this is now an
operator Ht, which
plays the role of our operator
T mu or T mu to the k.
So everything we talked about
with a little bit more analysis
in PDE to set things up,
everything we talked about
applies here.
So for instance, SL2 of Fp
acts isometrically on X of p.
And therefore, it acts
on the eigenspaces of Ht.
They have multiplicity.
And also, you can do lifting.
So Ht tilde is the heat
operator on the universal cover,
the hyperbolic plane.
And then Ht of x1,
x2 is the sum over g
in gamma p of Ht tilde
x1 tilde gx2 tilde.
So, in other words,
the new heat operator
is-- take the heat operator
on the hyperbolic plane
and push it forward.
And that follows
basically because this
is a local equation.
So solution to the heat
equation, you pull back,
you get a solution
to the heat equation.
And Ht tilde, the heat kernel
on the hyperbolic plane,
it has an explicit formula.
And that's the equivalent
that plays the role
of the vague statement.
So this hopefully
is a dictionary
of most of the
elements of our proof.
They all have natural analogs
for this hyperbolic surface.
And the one that was
the most troubling
has a less troubling
analog, or the one that
was not stated precisely would
have a precisely stated analog.
So without doing all
the details, if you then
translate the proof that
we did into the setting
of hyperbolic
surfaces, then that
would give a proof of
a theorem like this one
with a constant that's
not quite as good.
But usually, it doesn't matter.
Yeah?
AUDIENCE: I have a question
about the heat flow.
Since the spaces X
of p are not compact,
does there have to be
some of decay condition
to make the heat flow
well-defined in these spaces?
LAWRENCE GUTH: Yeah.
So the question is, since
X of p is not compact,
should we have some
kind of decay condition
to make the heat flow work?
Yeah, I think the answer is yes.
So these spaces
have finite area.
So it's not as bad as it would
be in some other settings.
But I think we should say
something about the solution
not going crazy near infinity.
Yeah, so this is the
end of our discussion
of the Selberg theorem for this
particular set of generators.
So take a moment
to see if you have
questions or comments about it.
And then we'll
explore what would
happen if we didn't have that
particular set of generators.
Yeah, anything on
people's minds?
Yeah?
AUDIENCE: Can you
give some intuition
why the support
grows exponentially?
LAWRENCE GUTH: Yeah, so the
question was, if we go back to--
we were thinking about, we had
a probability measure on SL2Z,
we convolve it with
itself a lot of times,
and then we discovered
that the support is roughly
evenly distributed
on a ball of size T,
But T grows
exponentially with k.
OK, yeah, so this is a kind of
different behavior from what
happens on the real line.
And let's think about
what's going on.
So M, let's say, is
just evenly distributed
between a few matrices,
maybe the matrices
in the Selberg thing.
So now, I'm going to
take k of those matrices,
and I'm going to
multiply them together.
Now, if I multiply
k matrices together,
the biggest that the
entries could be at the end
is exponential in k.
On the other hand, you might
wonder, is it really that big?
Or is there some cancellation?
Suppose I had 1 by 1
matrices, and I had a measure,
at 50% I was 1/2,
and 50%, it was 2.
Take k of those, and I
multiply them together.
What would happen?
Well, there would a
lot of cancellation.
There are a lot of cancellations
between the 1/2s and the 2s
It would get clearer
to us if we took
the logarithm of everything.
And the size of
that would actually
end up being exponential
of the square root of k.
So the 2 by 2 case is
different from that.
The actual size of this is
typically exponential in k.
There's not as much
cancellation of that kind.
And let's see, how could we
get some intuition about that?
AUDIENCE: Is it in some sense
because of the [INAUDIBLE]
LAWRENCE GUTH: Yeah,
that's a good comment.
So the comment was
SL2Z is virtually free.
So it's not very likely to go
out in SL2Z and then come back.
And that's a related fact.
Yeah, so it's also related
to hyperbolic geometry.
So you do a random walk in the
hyperbolic plane, if you take
s steps, you'll typically
be around a distance
s from the origin.
And that's because
the hyperbolic plane
is branching out.
And so at every moment, you're
not equally likely to be going
back towards the origin or
away, you're kind of 3/4
of the directions are away.
And that's what life is
like inside of the matrices.
Yeah, great question.
Anything else on people's minds?
OK, all right, so let's look
back at this Selberg theorem,
now that we
understand it better.
And we had this
particular A listed here.
What did we really use about A?
What was special about A?
Yeah?
AUDIENCE: We used the fact that
it was a generator of SL2Fp.
LAWRENCE GUTH: Yeah,
so we used that
as a generator of SL2 of Fp.
And what I'd like
us all to think
about is if we had any set
of generators of SL2Fp,
do we think that this
would still be true?
And do we think that this
proof would still work?
I'll write that down
while you think.
it.
So question, can we replace A by
any set of generators of SL2Fp?
Yeah?
AUDIENCE: So at minimum, they
need to be symmetric, right?
LAWRENCE GUTH: Yeah, let's
say they're symmetric.
Let's focus on the
symmetric case.
That makes things
technically easier.
And I would be happy with any
symmetric set of generators.
Yeah?
AUDIENCE: Well, does
the set of generators
still need to be kind of at
least close to virtually free?
LAWRENCE GUTH:
Does it still need
to be close to virtually free?
Yeah, that's a good question.
So although I mentioned
being virtually free,
we didn't actually use
virtually free in the proof.
That was for intuition.
But we used something
in the proof.
Yeah, well, it's--
AUDIENCE: They're conjugate to
their own powers or something
like that, right?
LAWRENCE GUTH:
They're conjugate.
So a nifty feature
of these guys,
so the comment
was these guys are
conjugate to their own powers.
Yeah, so that's important.
But we didn't use that either.
So when we proved that every
representation of SL2Fp is big,
we considered these elements.
And we used the
fact that they're
conjugate to their own powers.
But once we knew abstractly that
every representation of SL2Fp
is big, we just used
it as a black box.
So it's not important
that these elements
in the statement of
Selberg's theorem
are the same elements
we used in that proof.
Yeah, good.
But well, so one
part of the answer
is that we used that A is a
set of generators of SL2Z.
So in the proof where we
lifted things to SL2Z,
we took this set A,
we lifted it to SL2Z,
and then we did a
random walk on SL2Z.
And we needed to know that thing
was kind of evenly distributed.
And the only way we could
hope for that to be true
is if this was a set
of generators of SL2Z.
Yeah?
AUDIENCE: Are there any
even straightforward sets
of generators of SL2Fp that
would not be generators of SL2Z?
LAWRENCE GUTH: OK,
so the question
is, could it happen that we
have generators of SL2Fp,
but they don't generate SL2Z?
And the answer is yes.
That happens fairly commonly.
And let me show you an example.
So here's an example.
Maybe we won't prove everything,
but let's say that Ak--
no, I should use a
different letter.
Am is the set of 1 plus or minus
m, 1, 0, and 1 plus or minus m,
1, 0.
So this is still a
set of four elements.
Size of A equals 4.
And if m is 1 or 2,
it generates SL2Z.
But if m is at
least 3, it does not
generate-- does
not generate SL2Z.
On the other hand, for every
m, for all almost every p,
so for all but finitely many
p, this Am generates SL2Fp.
All right, so why
does this happen?
All right, so notice
that this guy is 1, 0, 1,
1 to the plus or minus m right.
So we assume that these
guys generate SL2Z.
It's not that hard to show.
Take a word in these
guys, it's only
included in the group
generated by these guys
if it has a rather special
structure that each letter is
raised to the plus or minus
n-th power, so maybe m is 10.
So now it's clear that most
words do not look like that.
Now, it's not
immediately clear that we
don't have the whole group,
because an element in the group
might be represented
by many words,
but we mentioned before that
there has a finite index
subgroup which is free.
So there are not that many
ways to represent most words.
So this tiny subset
of the words,
we don't expect it to cover
very much of the group.
And life is different in SL2Fp.
And a little later,
we'll talk about who
are the subgroups of SL2Fp.
But there aren't a
whole lot of them.
And once you have enough
elements that they're not
trapped in a subgroup, then they
must generate the whole group.
OK, all right, so
there are other choices
of generators for SL2Z.
Any choice of generators
would have worked fine
in our argument, but it's
actually quite common
that you have some
generators for SL2Fp,
and they don't generate SL2Z.
In this case, our argument
doesn't work very well.
Let's say that Gm is the
group generated by Am.
This group is a lot harder
to understand than SL2Z.
So for instance, if you
were to write down a matrix
and then you'd
like to know is it
in Gm, that's not super
easy to figure out.
SL2Z are all the
integer matrices
where the entries satisfy the
equation ad minus bc equals 1.
Whether or not a
matrix is in this group
does not have a simple
criterion like that.
As far as I know, the
best thing-- well,
I don't know anything faster to
do than to take the generators
and multiply them
together in different ways
and see if you get this matrix.
Yeah?
AUDIENCE: How close
is Gm to gamma m?
Do they have anything in common?
Because at first,
it sort of look
like things congruent
to the identity mod m.
LAWRENCE GUTH: Right,
so Gm is a subgroup.
So OK, so the question was
how close is Gm to gamma m?
Remember that gamma m was the
subgroup of matrices in SL2Z
that are congruent to
the identity mod m.
So these guys are congruent
to the identity mod m.
So therefore, Gm is a
subgroup of gamma m.
However, this group has infinite
index In SL2Z for m at least 3.
Whereas, gamma m
had finite index
because it was the kernel
of a map to a finite group.
So gamma m, which is already
not a super easy thing
to understand if m is
large, this is well--
objectively, this is a
smaller group than gamma m,
and subjectively, I think
it is a harder group
to understand than gamma m.
So this whole method
has not really worked.
And in fact, it goes in
the opposite direction.
So namely, for
generators of SL2Z,
we first understand
SL2Z really well,
and then we can use
that to understand SL2Fp
with those generators.
And with a situation like
this, there's some progress.
And it goes, first, you
try to understand SL2Fp
with those generators,
and you use
that to try to
understand G of m.
There's actually
a big literature
now about these groups G of m.
And first, you try to figure
out things about SL2Fp
with those generators.
So that's one part of the
answer to this question.
And what we said so far is
that our proof doesn't usually
work for other
sets of generators,
but that's not an
answer to the question
whether the theorem is true.
And as far as we know, the
theorem may well be true.
So there's a
conjecture you could
take any set of
generators of SL2Fp,
you just always have
a spectral gamma.
That's not proven
yet, but there's
some significant progress.
And I will tell you
something about it.
Yeah?
AUDIENCE: What's the
equivalent spectral statement?
LAWRENCE GUTH: What is the
So if you take--
so I'm not sure if
this is your question,
but let me say
something, and then--
so if we take another
set of generators here,
we have a different
operator, and we can
ask what is sigma 1 and so on.
But so I think what
you were wondering
is if we took another
set of generators there,
would that be related
to the spectrum
of the Laplacian of something?
Is that your question?
OK.
OK, so not as far as I know.
And so you might say
this theorem is great
because it connects to
this hyperbolic geometry,
and it tells us really
interesting estimate
for the spectrum
of some surface.
With other generators, maybe
it doesn't exactly do that.
But on the other hand, it
says some interesting stuff
about this group,
which is interesting
in some other problems.
Yeah, let's leave that.
All right, so suppose we're just
given any set A inside of SL2Fp,
and we'd like to figure out
if there's a spectral gap.
One thing that we
know could go wrong
is that A could be
contained in a subgroup.
So if A is contained in H,
which is a proper subgroup,
then sigma 1 of TA is 1.
All right, so that's
elementary to see.
But in order to
really use this, we
would actually-- it
helps to know what
are all the proper subgroups.
So let's talk a little bit about
the classification of subgroups
of SL2Fp.
So the classification
was done by someone
named Dickson in 1901.
And it's not that hard, but
it's not that easy either.
And I was a little
surprised to learn
that if you'd like to classify
the subgroups of SLDFp,
that was only done--
first of all, it's only
done approximately.
And it was only done
around the year 2000.
So some of these problems
actually are really pretty hard.
So it's done by Dixon in 1901.
OK, well, let's think
of some subgroups.
We could have the diagonal
subgroup, which is typically
called T for torus.
There's this guy.
We have the upper triangular,
unipotent subgroup, like that.
Let me put a little 0 here.
And we have the more
general upper triangular
guys, which have that.
Now, if you take a subgroup,
you can conjugate it,
and you can get
another subgroup.
So you can conjugate
all of these.
And so let me write B, that
means a conjugate of B0.
So those are a
bunch of subgroups.
Those are the only
ones that I was
able to think of without effort.
There are a few other small
subgroups, like for instance,
apparently the icosahedral group
appears in SL2Fp for some p's.
And the statement of
the classification
is a lot easier if we don't
say exactly what groups appear,
but just kind of roughly
and ignore small groups.
So there's a theorem about this.
The rough theorem would say if
H in SL2Fp is a proper subgroup,
then there exists a Borel
subgroup B, one of these guys,
and B intersect H is a large
fraction of H. So this c
bigger than 0 is a
universal constant.
So more or less, H is not
quite in B, but almost all.
H has a very large
part that's in B.
And B is a conjugate of B0.
And the fine print is
conjugate of B0 conjugated
by not necessarily
someone in SL2Fp,
but maybe the matrix
we conjugate by
might involve the
algebraic closure.
Anyway, it's fine.
Now, let's make a remark.
The analog of this is not true.
For SL2Fq, q is a prime
power because SL2Fp
is a subgroup of SL2Fq.
but SL2Fp is not contained
in any upper triangular
or something.
So there's an analogous
theorem for SL2Fq,
but it needs to be stated a
little bit different way to take
account of the subfields.
So this may already start
to remind us of something
that we've seen, that
projection theory is
different over Fp and Fq.
OK, so now, I can state
the second main theorem
that I wanted to say
about random walks
on groups, which is a
generalization of Selberg's
theorem.
And it allows to take
any set of generators
where it's not trapped
in a Borel subgroup,
but it requires a
little quantification,
which is perhaps
not quite as strong
as one might fantasize about.
All right, so for every
epsilon bigger than 0, there
are a couple of positive
constants every p.
So if I have a subset of
SL2Fp, and the subset is not
contained in a Borel
subgroup, and also it
doesn't concentrate too
much in a Borel subgroup,
so for every B Borel, if I
take A intersected with B,
this is, at most, p to the
minus epsilon size of B
and with this small constant.
So a smallish-- sorry, size of
A. So only a small fraction of A
is in this Borel subgroup.
And it's a p to the epsilon
kind of fraction where you--
that's a pretty small fraction.
You might hope to
do a little better,
but anyway, that's what it says.
And here, I wasn't positive--
so when I proved it,
I needed to say coset,
but I'm not sure if it's
coset or subgroup, anyway.
So if it doesn't concentrate
in something closely related
to a subgroup, then it expands.
So then it has a mixed
signal 1 of TA is less than 1
minus c of epsilon.
So up to a little bit
of quantification,
if A is contained
in a Borel subgroup,
definitely we won't
have a spectral gap.
And if A doesn't intersect
a Borel subgroup too much,
then we will have
a spectral gap.
It's almost if and only
if, although you might hope
to improve this a little bit.
So this is kind of its
own story to talk about.
So since we're almost
done, let me just
make a couple of high
level comments about it.
Yeah?
AUDIENCE: What's
a Borel subgroup?
LAWRENCE GUTH: A Borel--
so I don't know why-- so
Borel is involved in this.
A Borel subgroup
is these guys B.
Take an upper triangular
matrix, that's a Borel subgroup,
or conjugate that.
So one comment
about this theorem
is that we had better
know this theorem.
You better know
something like this.
And so the first
part of this theorem
is to prove that if you
don't have a spectral gap,
then there must
be a subset that's
kind of approximately a subgroup
that intersects A a lot.
If you don't have
a spectral gap,
there must be a subset that's
kind of approximately a subgroup
where maybe A convolved
with itself many times
is heavily concentrated in
this approximate subgroup.
And that's a very nice argument.
And it turns out
to use the tools
from additive combinatorics.
It uses like
Balog-Szemeredi-Gowers
and things like that in a
non-commutative version.
And then the second part
of the proof is to say,
is kind of a robust
version of this theorem.
This is a classification
of actual subgroups.
We want to make it a
little bit stronger
and have a classification
of approximate subgroups.
So not only any
actual proper subgroup
would have to intersect
a Borel subgroup a lot,
but actually, any kind
of approximate subgroup,
so any subset where when you
multiply it by itself two
or three times, it doesn't
get very much bigger,
the only way that can happen
is if your subset heavily
intersects a Borel subgroup.
Now, that second part, you'll
notice, is not true over Fp--
sorry, it's not true over Fq.
And so the second part will
draw on some product theory
and our theorems
that we worked very
hard on that give a projection
estimate over Fp that's
not true over Fq.
We will need that.
And so I think this is
a nice example of how
those theorems are
only an epsilon
improvement on a
trivial estimate where
epsilon is very small.
But it still is meaningful.
There's an important
difference between epsilon
being zero or not zero.
And they're used to prove
kind of this c of epsilon
is pretty small.
But there's just a really
important difference
between whether
you had zero here,
which is like a completely
vacuous statement,
and whether you had
1 minus epsilon,
which even if epsilon
is a small constant,
is a qualitatively sharp
statement about how
these random walk mixes.
OK, cool.
So we'll talk more about
those things on Thursday.